Monitor Flows and Extensions (#6)
directus-community/guest-authoring: monitoring_flows_and_extensions/index.md

---

> title: 'Monitoring Flows & Extensions'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Building a Monitoring Pipeline For Flows And Extensions'
```

Reviewer: Makes it clear this is hands-on with a real project attached.

description: 'We build a logging and monitoring pipeline for Directus applications without using any third-party dependencies.'
author:
  name: 'Daniel Band'
  avatar_file_name: 'daniel.jpg'
---
Directus offers a flexible and extensible foundation for creating a wide range of applications. However, to address more complex use cases such as Backend as a Service or internal applications, we will develope a strategy for monitoring the application's state in this article.

> What benefits does monitoring give us:
> - Insights into the flow of data
> - Makes a production application debuggable
> - Allows us to listen to events and send out notifications via different channels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's lots of benefits to monitoring - gaining insights into the flow of data in your application, easier debugging when things go wrong, and a convenient way to send out multi-channel notifications when certain events occur.
```

> ## How is event monitoring different from activity logs and revision?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Event Monitoring vs Activity Logs and Revisions
```

>  In the context of Directus, activity logs allow us to identify changes on a per-collection item basis, providing a trail to retrace the execution of workflows and view the input/output of operations. On the other hand, event logs focus on tracking specific pieces of data. The difference in granularity between activity tracking and event logging makes them complement each other. For instance, in a monitoring pipeline, when a specific event triggers an alert, we can use revisions to trace back the execution flow to analyze the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of Directus, activity logs allow us to identify changes on a per-item basis, providing a trail to retrace the execution of workflows and view the input/output of operations, while event logs focus on tracking specific pieces of data. 

The difference in granularity between activity tracking and event logging makes them complementary. For instance, in a monitoring pipeline, when a specific event triggers an alert, revisions can be used to trace the execution flow and analyze the context.
```

Reviewer: This is honestly fantastic context! Breaking it up will help the reader better digest the information. The first paragraph is definitions, and the second contextualises the realtionship.

> ## What events do we want to log?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What You Should Log
```

There are two main categories of events that serve different purposes.

> First, events that help us debug errors. These should contain information what, when and where something went wrong, accompanied by metadata to make the job of debugging easier. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, events that help us **debug errors**. These should contain information what, when, and where something went wrong, accompanied by metadata to make debugging easier. 
```

> The second type of events provides transactional data about the application state. Consider a scenario where we periodically import participants from an event ticketing app. In such cases, we want to track whether the import process started, the number of participants successfully imported, any import failures, and the reasons behind those failures. Event logs are instrumental in answering these questions without having to look at flow revisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second type of events provides **transactional data** about the application state. Consider a scenario where we periodically import participants from an event ticketing app. In such cases, we want to track whether the import process started, the number of participants successfully imported, any import failures, and the reasons behind those failures. Event logs are instrumental in answering these questions without having to look at flow revisions.
```

Reviewer: Compared to the suggestion above, where I bold 'debug errors', it's not as clear to me here whether it should be 'transactional data' or 'application state', or perhaps something else entirely. Happy to take your lead here.

Author: I replaced **transactional data** with **analytical data**. I think it's more accurate.

> Furthermore, instead of sending email notifications directly from the location where an event occurs, we establish a separate workflow that listens for specific event types. This decoupling of alerting from our core business logic provides several advantages. It allows us to easily switch notification channels or transition to an external monitoring solution when the need arises, offering greater flexibility and adaptability in our alerting system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of sending email notifications directly from the location where an event occurs, we can also establish a separate workflow that listens for specific event types. Decoupling alerting from our core business logic provides allows us to easily switch notification channels or transition to an external monitoring solution when the need arises, offering greater flexibility and adaptability in our alerting system.
```

Just making this a bit more succinct. I always ask myself in a review 'does this word add value for the time it takes to read and understand', as context to this suggestion.

> ## Before we start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Before We Start
```

> You will need a Directus project running - either using Directus Cloud or by Self Hosting. Also, you need to configure email transport.

Reviewer: 'configure email transport' needs any of: some more context, a link to a guide, or instructions.

Author: Also, you might need to [configure email transport](https://docs.directus.io/self-hosted/config-options.html#email) if you are self-hosting Directus.

Reviewer: Got it 🫡

After that, start by creating the following collections and fields:

participants:
- id (Primary key: generated uuid)
- name: (Type: string, Interface: Input)
- email: (Type: string, Interface: Input, required)

> log_events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
log_events:
```

- id (Primary key: generated uuid)
- event_name (Type: string, Interface: Input)
- context: (Type: string, Interface: Input)
- execution_id: (Type: uuid, Interface: Input)
- event_date (Type: timestamp, Interface: Datetime)
- meta: (Type: json, Interface: Code)

> **event_name** is a resource identfier with a common meaning accross all events. It can be specific (triggered only at one location) or generic (triggered from multiple locations) with added meta data. For example, a generic event *ressource-not-found* could be enriched with the meta data *collection: string, id: any*, while an event *import-participants-failed* is a specific locator.
> 
> **context** identifies the location where the event takes place. While the **event_name** is reusable, the **context** should be distinct. We can build context hierachies, e.g. to locate events in subflows. The event *import-participants-failed* could be in the **context** (flow) *import-participants*. For this article we stick with a simple string input.
> 
> **execution_id** is a grouping identifier. For each execution within a **context**, all events share the same identifier. This gives us the possibility to look at the event from a broader perspective. 
> 
> **event_date** is a unix timestamp, which is set when the event is triggered, before it's inserted into the database.
> 
> **meta** is a JSON object, holding all additional information. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **event_name** is a resource identifier with a common meaning across all events. It can be specific (triggered only at one location) or generic (triggered from multiple locations) with added meta data. For example, a generic event *resource-not-found* could be enriched with the meta data *collection: string, id: any*, while an event *import-participants-failed* is a specific locator.
- **context** identifies the location where the event takes place. While the **event_name** is reusable, the **context** should be distinct. We can build context hierarchies, e.g. to locate events in subflows. The event *import-participants-failed* could be in the **context** (flow) *import-participants*. For this article we stick with a string input.
- **execution_id** is a grouping identifier. For each execution within a **context**, all events share the same identifier. This gives us the possibility to look at the event from a broader perspective. 
- **event_date** is a unix timestamp, which is set when the event is triggered, before it's inserted into the database.
- **meta** is a JSON object, holding all additional information. 
```

> ## Create a monitoring & logging pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a Monitoring and Logging Pipeline
```

With our collection setup, let's create a trigger Flow whose purpose is to set the event date and merge all metadata. This flow will be triggered by other flows each time we want to log an event.

![A Flow which creates event logs](create_event_log.png "")

The flow expects the following input payload:
```js
{
    event_name: string,
    context: string,
    execution_id: uuid,
    meta: Object | Array<Object>
}
```

Before we create the final event payload we set the current timestamp for our event and merge the meta keys together in case they are passed as array. 

```

> :::info Be carefull

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info Be careful
```

import { defineOperationApi } from '@directus/extensions-sdk';
import { randomUUID as uuidv4 } from 'crypto';
import { mapValues, isPlainObject} from 'lodash';

type Options = {
	loggingContext: string;
	metaData: any
};

export default defineOperationApi<Options>({
	id: 'initialize_logger',
	handler: ({ loggingContext, metaData }, {logger}) => {
		// Iterate through a nested object
		// https://github.com/lodash/lodash/issues/1244
		const mapValuesDeep = (obj, fn) =>
			mapValues(obj, (val, key) =>
				isPlainObject(val) ? mapValuesDeep(val, fn) : fn(val, key, obj)
			)

		metaData = mapValuesDeep(metaData, function(val, key, obj) {
			if (key == 'password') {
				val = '*****'
			}

			return val;
		});

		return {uuid: uuidv4(), context: loggingContext, meta: metaData}
	},
});
```
</details>

**3.** Create the participants from the payloads body.

**4.** We either log a success or an error.

In this case we would log an error, if the required email is missing in one the payloads participants.

![How to trigger a log event. Select trigger flow operation, use Create log event as flow, and pass event_name, context_id, execution_id, and meta as JS object](trigger_log_event.png "")

> We can store events but still need a way to receive notifications. Additionally, we might only want to receive a subset of the events we create. Let's build a notification Flow that hooks onto created events and sends emails for the events we are interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can store events but still need a way to receive notifications. Additionally, we might only want to receive a subset of the events we create. Let's build a notification Flow that is triggered by created events and sends emails for the events we are interested in.
```

		const payload = trigger.payload;
		if (!events.includes(payload.event_name)) {
			return;
		}

		payload.meta = liquifyMeta(payload.meta);

		const schema = await getSchema({ database });
		const context = {database: database, schema: schema, accountability: accountability};

		const { MailService } = services;
        const mailService = new MailService({ schema: context.schema, knex: context.database });
        
		await mailService.send({
			to: to,
			subject: `Directus Event - ${payload.event_name}`,
			template: {
				name: 'event-notification',
				data: payload,
			},
		});
	},
});

function liquifyMeta(meta: Object) {
	const ret = [];
	for (const [key, value] of Object.entries(meta)) {
		ret.push({'key': key, 'value': JSON.stringify(value)});
	}
	return ret;
}

```
</details>

<details>
<summary>Email template used in notify_on_event</summary>

```html
<body>
  Eventname: {{ event_name }}<br>
  Eventdate: {{ event_date }}<br>
  Context: {{ context }}<br>
  <p>
    Meta:<br>
    {% for metadata in meta %}
      {{ metadata.key }}: {{ metadata.value }}<br>
    {% endfor %}
  </p>
  Execution ID: {{ execution_id }}
</body>
```
</details>

## Summary

> While this setup is straightforward, it serves as a foundational step for monitoring your application. Typically, you would externalize your monitoring to avoid impacting your production database. However, if your workload is relatively small, this approach remains a viable solution, as you won't require any third-party services.
> 
> With this configuration in place, you have the option to create an insights panel to enhance your data analysis. Additionally, you can revamp the notification process by customizing the default email template or adding more templates based on the event's name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This setup serves as a foundational step for monitoring your application. Typically, you would externalize your monitoring to avoid impacting your production database. However, if your workload is relatively small, this approach is a viable solution, as you won't require any third-party services.

With this configuration in place, you have the option to create an insights panel to enhance your data analysis. Additionally, you can revamp the notification process by customizing the default email template or adding more templates based on the event's name.
```
